---
subject: 'F102'
session: 'JUNE'
year: '2022'
paper: 'general'
question: 'Q4'
chapters:
source_type: 'examiners_report'
time_allocated_minutes: ''
---

## QUESTION 4

i. Factors to consider:

- The nature, term and currency of the liabilities, and the most suitable assets that match the liabilities. ➢ Liabilities include guaranteed benefits (sum assured and reversionary bonuses declared), future reversionary bonuses, terminal bonuses and life office expenses.

- Policyholder expectations for future bonuses will determine the extent to which assets with high expected (but volatile) returns should be included in backing liabilities for future bonuses.

- The company's free assets and risk tolerance will determine the extent to which free assets may be used to smooth bonuses in order to pursue a more aggressive investment strategy.

- Free assets will also determine the extent to which guaranteed benefits may be mismatched.

- Regulations may affect investment in certain assets and asset classes.

- Differences in the tax treatment of various assets may influence the preference for some assets over others.

- Availability of assets - as this is a developed country, it is unlikely that asset managers will be restricted by this.

ii. Modelling exercise required:

- The company must define the outcomes to be measured (e.g. probability of insolvency for a specified bonus philosophy) and the time horizon.

- Input assumptions for the liabilities and assets are required. ➢ Assumptions should be best estimate and should not include margins. ➢ For the liabilities: demographic assumptions, bonus philosophy. ➢ For the assets: expected returns, variances, correlations, tax rates.

- The number of simulations must be high enough to enable probabilities of extreme events to be measured. ➢ For each simulation, asset returns, interest and inflation rates are generated by the stochastic economic scenario generator/model for each future time period up to the time horizon.

- The starting point for the asset projection is the current split of assets (as it is being tested for appropriateness).

- The liability cashlow projection could use all policies, or model points of existing business, and new business. ➢ For each policy, future probability-weighted cashflows are calculated (e.g. for decrements). ➢ Future bonus additions will be based on projected asset returns and on a modelled algorithm that mirrors the company's bonus philosophy. ➢ Life office expenses are projected by linking these to projected inflation rates.

- The model should produce net cashflows, assets, liabilities and solvency requirements and solvency level for each future period up to the time horizon.

- The company is thus able to measure the probability of various outcomes against its requirements e.g. probability of insolvency associated with a specific strategy (and expected bonus level). ➢ If insolvency probability appears too high, the company should consider changes to its investment strategy.

iii. Guaranteed annuity option:

- The liability projections will now be based on a model point representing a 55 year old policyholder and typical single premium.

- For each scenario: ➢ The value of assets and liabilities is projected (as before) up to the maturity date for the single model point to derive a projected maturity value. ➢ Projected long-term interest rates at the maturity date should be produced by the stochastic economic scenario generator, from which a market price for annuities can be estimated at maturity (age 65). ➢ At maturity the then-expected market annuity price is compared to the guaranteed annuity price; if the guaranteed annuity price is lower, it will most likely be exercised. ➢ The cost of the guarantee can be calculated as the present value at maturity of the difference between the guaranteed annuity income and market annuity income:

- Cost = Max {Projected Maturity Value × (market annuity price/guaranteed annuity price - 1), 0}

- The average cost is the sum of all costs over all scenarios divided by the number of scenarios, the median or other percentile greater than 50% may be used if the insurer wants to be more conservative.

- The above cost is discounted to policy inception (at age 55) and may be expressed as a percentage of the initial single premium.

iv. Guaranteed annuity option:

- The guaranteed annuity option has positive value when market annuity prices rise above the guaranteed annuity price i.e. when market long-bond interest rates fall below the rate implied in the guaranteed annuity price.

- Options that mirror this guarantee include: ➢ European call option on long bonds, with exercise price corresponding to price implied by the guaranteed annuity price, and term of 10 years. ➢ European put option on long bond interest rates, with exercise price corresponding to interest rate implied by the guaranteed annuity price, and term of 10 years. ➢ Swaption - option to swap floating rate returns at the option (maturity) date for fixed rate returns.

annuity price per unit income. Many candidates failed to make the obvious point that the maturity value must be projected to establish the projected annuity amounts.
Part (iv) was reasonably well answered by most, however, many candidates were too careless and imprecise in their answers, for example listing European call or put options, without specifying the underlying asset/instrument that the option is written on.
