---
subject: 'F102'
session: 'JUNE'
year: '2020'
paper: 'general'
question: 'Q4'
chapters:
source_type: 'examiners_report'
time_allocated_minutes: ''
---

## QUESTION 4

i. Reasons for deferring surplus distribution:

- Improve solvency position:

- Deferring the distribution of profit improves the solvency position of the fund because once a regular bonus is declared, it increases the guarantees provided by the company.

- Profit deferral therefore provides a cushion against which movements in volatile asset values can be absorbed without threatening the solvency of the insurer.

- It will also provide a cushion to absorb worse than anticipated experience, for example worse than anticipated claims experience.

- Business objectives:

- Deferring profit distribution leads to relatively higher free assets.

- This provides the insurer with the investment freedom to invest in riskier asset classes, such as equities, to achieve higher investment returns.

- Such higher returns can be passed on to policyholders by declaring attractive rates of bonus.

- May have an impact on the insurer's competitive position. And may, in turn, attract more new business.

- As a source of funding:

- Deferral of surplus distribution can also act as a source of funding for the insurer, by essentially borrowing from the policyholder, which can enable the insurer to:

- Write more new business than would otherwise be possible.

- This is because the insurer will have more free assets to absorb the new business strain.

- Meeting policyholders' expectations:

- The policyholders may have wanted the insurer to smooth investment returns (that is why they bought this product).

- This can only be achieved by deferring profit distribution in years when investment returns are very good and distributing more than earned during the years when returns are poor.

ii. Factors determining the bonus rates:

- Financial soundness of the fund:

- The actual investment returns generated by the with-profits fund.

- This is because the company will not wish to distribute more than it is earning on average.

- The company will also consider the bonus earning capacity of the fund.

- The regular bonus would be less than the total long term capacity of the fund.

- Given the poor (below inflation) recent investment returns, bonus rates will need to be low to allow for this.

- The bonus declared cannot be less than the guaranteed rate, which may be greater than 0%.

- Investment strategy:

- A large proportion of the assets of the fund is invested in equity (local and foreign), which means the expected investment returns are expected to be higher in the long term, but will come with much higher volatility.

- It is likely that a large proportion from this source of investment return will be distributed via a terminal bonus rather than the regular bonus.

- The income yield from cash investments and the local and foreign bonds, is likely to be relatively stable.

- This source of investment return is suited for distribution through the regular bonus.

- If the fund actively trades in the bonds, then there may be capital gains and losses over time.

- It is likely that a large proportion from this source of investment return is will not be distributed via a regular bonus.

- If the fund has a significant exposure to foreign assets this introduces some additional currency risk.

- However, it may also result in some diversification benefits and as a result more stable returns, which may allow a relatively higher regular bonus rate.

- Ability to deal with adverse experience:

- The greater the fund's free assets, the less need it will have to boost those assets by holding back surplus.

- Bonus philosophy:

- The life company will have developed a particular approach to distributing surplus under its with-profits policies and will not want to depart from this without good reason.

- In particular, the policy on the split between the regular bonus rate and terminal bonus on smoothing over time will need to be considered.

- The recent returns have been poor and the company will need to consider the fairness of the bonus declaration across tranches of business.

- Policyholders' reasonable expectations:

- These will have arisen from literature provided by the life company, both at the point of sale and subsequently, past practice and the levels generally available in the market.

- Ideally the company would not want to change the regular bonus rate too frequently

- Competition:

- The company will not wish to declare a bonus rate too far out of line with those of competitors.

- If there is a significant difference, the company may experience lapses or poor new business sales. Candidates that were well prepared did well on part (i) which was a bookwork question. Some candidates did not follow the instruction to outline four reasons, and just listed considerations. Part (ii) required a discussion of the likely impact of the strategic asset allocation on the bonus rate declaration decision. Some candidates suggested changes to the strategic asset allocation and therefore did not answer the question asked.
